Hey, guys. Ready to do a podcast?
>> Yeah.
>> Yep. Awesome. Everyone out in the live chat, thanks for being here. It's awesome
to have you on the channel. And we'll go ahead and kick this off.
Hello and welcome to Python Bytes where we deliver Python news and headlines directly
to your earbuds. This is episode 264, recorded December 22nd, 2021. I'm Michael Kennedy.
>> And I am Kim. >> Welcome. You've been on talk Python before
but not here on Python. >> I've done a couple of talk Pythons with
you including the one where you bravely submitted yourself to questions from your audience.
The other one talking some small tools. That was very good fun. I'm very much looking forward
to this one as well. >> You know, both episodes you were on were
super popular. One was about little automation tools and just cool stuff that people can
pick up unusual easily there.
And that was great.
And the ask me anything was surprisingly
one of the more popular episodes as well.
So thank you for being part of that.
And you've been part of the audience for sure.
You've offered comments and feedback
as we do the live show.
- Hope you see so, yeah, to be honest.
- Yeah, but now here you are on stage.
Thank you for being here.
Tell people a bit about yourself before we get started.
- Sure, I am a DevOps engineer at the moment
and also move engineering based in South Africa,
working with a home loan provider
or a mortgage provider in the American sense.
I've been probably doing Python for close on 20 years.
So the fact that I've shaved
means you can't see the gray beard,
but I have been around a while.
- I think gray beard.
We're gonna come back for some good jokes
at the end about this as well.
Not your beard, but just beards.
- Cool, fair enough.
- Great, great, yeah.
Awesome, that sounds like really fun stuff.
So yeah, thanks for being here.
Now, before we actually get into the main content
of the show, Brian, I wanna do something
just a little bit meta.
So I went and pulled up or created a question air for people.
When we first created Python Bytes,
we're like, all right, it's 20 minutes.
The time of this episode is gonna be 20 minutes.
So we're just gonna like knock it out,
you and me real quick.
And I think it's grown a little bit.
We've done, we cover a little bit more detail.
We've added a joke.
We've added a few like little extra things.
We brought on guests like Kim.
And is that still in line with what people want
when they signed up?
So I put together a questionnaire here
that just asks three simple questions.
And I'd really appreciate if listeners
could go to the show notes and just click
on the link that says this three question Google form
or find it on our Twitter account or wherever,
but should be in your podcast player show notes
right near the top.
And they can just click that and fill it out
give us some quick feedback on the idea of having a guest
on the show and so on.
So anything you wanna add about that, Brian,
just encourage people to give us feedback.
- Yeah, I'd love to hear feedback
because sometimes we feel a little guilty
that we're running long,
but I enjoy the a little bit more in-depth conversation.
We still don't go super deep, but I think it's a good...
Well, I'm flavoring the survey though,
so forget what I said.
- No, I'd love to hear feedback on what people think.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, so people can give us feedback there.
We'd really appreciate it.
The way people seem to be feeling so far
is they kind of like the link.
They definitely like the guest format.
So you're welcome here, Kim.
This, according to listeners, fantastic.
- Thank you.
- But yeah, I think people are generally liking,
but still, let's just hear from everyone
'cause if a bunch of the people in the audience are like,
no, we really want no more than 20 minutes,
and my going on about this is actually making it still longer
then it'd be great to know, right?
So we'll go from there.
And with that, let's play a game.
- Jump in the first topic, yeah.
I wanna talk about Jupyter games
and the idea around this is a iPython canvas
or iPy canvas with Box2D.
I'll get a little bit more into it.
But the gist is making video games
in small video games is one of the ways
that a lot of us started programming.
I know that was the case for me.
And they were not difficult games,
but it was difficult enough, these 2D engines.
And some of that's lacking, and I haven't seen that
in Jupyter before.
And Jupyter is an excellent platform for a lot of things,
especially teaching with people that
don't have computers if they use an iPad or something like that.
often they can still get access to Jupyter
through hosted systems.
So this is a Jupyter,
this article talks about writing 2D games
and mostly it's a 2D physics engine
around a library called Box2D,
which is a C++ type engine,
but it's something that you can access through Python.
And the author, yeah, the author--
- There's tons of physics stuff.
You know, when people think of games,
they think of, oh, here's what I got to do to get the picture on the screen.
Oh, that's just to start.
Like you need physics, you need collisions.
There's like so much stuff that also gets done.
So this is really cool.
I love it.
Things like physics and gravity and collision detection and, and, like
the examples on this page are great, but the person that wrote it is,
uh, Torsten Bier and he's one of the, I think he's, he's got a library called
Pi B2D, which is one of two different Python accesses
to this Box2D system, but it's pretty cool.
One of the things I like about this article is it talk,
it has like lots of pretty examples,
but physics engines are, even if they're built for games,
they can also be used for things like an engine simulation
or even like airflow simulations.
So there's a lot of cool uses for this too
that are outside of games.
But the incredible things
is how small the programs can be.
So this article has a contained,
like an attached notebook, hosted notebook
that has things like angry shapes,
which is like angry birds and a rocket game.
And there's a color mixing game,
which I was just fascinated by.
there's like a bunch of colors drop into it.
It isn't on the, it isn't listed on the article,
but if you go to the example,
it's kind of color mixing thing.
And it's only like 70 lines of code.
And with that, you can have some amazing physics examples.
And I'm pretty excited about this actually.
So I'd like to give it a try.
- You know, I think this makes a lot of sense
in the notebook form,
because you're trying to visualize certain things.
Sometimes graphs are fine, but other times,
they just don't capture like flow and that kind of stuff.
And it seems like game animation would be great.
Kim, what do you think?
- I was also gonna say, if you can get something
very impressive done in 70 lines of code as a learning tool,
that's brilliant because that's effectively
a screen of code.
Otherwise, you'd be looking at,
if you're looking at hundreds and hundreds of lines,
you know, if you're a seasoned developer,
that's perfectly reasonable, but to a new person,
that must look overwhelming.
Yeah, if you can fit a single screen and say,
here is it, this is everything you need
to make this thing work, it's quite a powerful tool.
And it looks like a lot of fun, actually.
- It does look fun.
- Yeah, there's some interesting,
the article talks about some interesting hoops
he had to jump through using iPie events
and iPie widgets and Canvas to be able to draw things
and get events from people.
But this is just some fun stuff.
Here's like the, we're showing on the screen,
the thing like Angry Birds.
And to be honest, like the playability of it,
isn't maybe like, it's not on the level of what,
you know, playing an Xbox or something like that,
obviously.
- You probably want to hook up a controller to it.
- Yeah.
But that you can do something like this so quickly
is pretty amazing.
So I-
- And also on the other hand, if you write,
once you write it yourself,
the playability actually doesn't matter that much.
You're looking at interacting with the thing you wrote.
I think, yeah.
- I love it.
This is really cool.
Nice find, Brian.
All right, let me tell you about
some really interesting cybersecurity side of things.
So I'm gonna first tell you about this thing
called a Think Canary,
but that's not actually what I wanna talk about.
It's just to set the stage.
Okay, so here's a challenge,
Something that always stresses me out is,
what if somebody was to break into your app,
into your systems, into your cloud infrastructure
or whatever, how would you know?
Right, like what would be the indicator, right?
If they don't trash it, they don't lock it
with crypto lockers or anything like that, ransomware,
then they could just cruise around there, right?
So this company Thinkst Canary created this,
I think you can put it in the cloud
as like a hosted container type thing,
or you can get like a little Raspberry Pi like things
and put them physically on your network
if you had a physical network.
And you could say, you act like a SQL server,
you act like an exchange server,
you, if somebody tries to search the network and says,
show me all the active directories, you be that.
Maybe we're not even using active directory
'cause we're not on Windows,
but if somebody breaks in,
they may well start looking for those types of things.
And what they'll do is they'll trigger alarms
if somebody tries to interact with them
and normal things shouldn't
because only if you're like trolling around
looking for them should it be discovered, right?
So that's what this is.
And with this whole log for shell stuff that's going on,
it's just such a nightmare of like,
well, we installed this app
that did invoice management for us.
Did it have a log for shell vulnerability?
I don't know, maybe they said they fixed it.
But if somebody gets in,
It's not just we have to patch the log for shell
or the log for J version.
We've also got to then know what else has been run
'cause they could have installed whatever, right?
So the thing I actually wanna recommend to Python people
is this thing called canary tokens.
So check this out.
This is fantastic.
So what you can do is you can get different things
that will then trigger alarms,
like emails or other sorts of stuff to you.
So I can come over here and I can say,
I would like to get a URL.
And if anybody visits that URL,
send me an email and say,
you know, whatever message I put in here.
So I could come in and say,
here's a URL and send me at Michael@talkbython,
email and say, this is hidden in the admin section unused.
Something like that.
If somebody sends me an email,
if I get that email,
somebody's gone in and clicked that link
in the admin section of my site.
And if I didn't, it gives you like IP address
all that sort of stuff of what comes back so if I didn't do it or it looks
like an unknown IP that should be highly concerning right so what else that URL
is interesting I can get a DNS token somebody requests like does a DNS look
up on rollouts dot Python bytes dot FM I can get an alert to that that'd be
pretty interesting a unique email address if somebody ever tries to
to contact that, a Word document.
So you get like a Word document and put it in say like
SharePoint or something dreadful like that.
And if it gets opened,
you'll get an email that somebody got that.
Let's see, you've got VPN wire guards,
file, you can create a custom EXE.
If somebody runs your EXE or a SQL server instance,
or you can even do like directly a log for shell link
that will run.
So if you are trying to like figure out,
just put stuff in there to let you know
somebody gets a part they're not supposed to be in,
like this is really cool.
There's no, it's free, it doesn't cost anything.
It doesn't require any setup,
like put a Word document in a folder.
If it gets opened, let us know.
What do you think?
- Well, I was gonna say,
I've been looking for ways to do exactly this kind of thing
'cause I'm totally unique in being concerned
that log for shell has got impacts
that I can't see on our systems.
Just because your public facing systems happen not to have used log4shell things
doesn't mean that you're necessarily safe. All it means is that if by some other means
somebody's got into one of your internal systems, wouldn't necessarily know that. So I'm very much
interested in this. I knew about canaries already. I happen to sponsor the local South African
PyCon ZA conference, but canary tokens are a very funky additional add-on to that.
- Exactly, I knew about the canaries as well,
and I'm like, ah, but that doesn't really apply
to the world that I live in, I'm not like in an enterprise.
But like this, these make a lot of sense,
and they're free, which I think is cool.
Yeah, here's what it looks like if you get a notice.
It says, this is the email I got,
"Your canary token was triggered,
"the channel was HTTP, the token was that,
"this is a test, the IP address of the person."
So this was one of those URLs,
somebody interacts with this URL, let me know.
Here's their user agent, here's the message,
there's the IP and so on.
So you would just get a notice like that,
that says somebody clicked on something
they shouldn't have had access to.
Yeah, so anyway, pretty neat.
Brian?
- Yeah, I'm not sure.
Yeah, it's actually pretty cool.
Some of the things I didn't think you could,
I wouldn't even expect,
like can somebody cloning your website?
- Yeah.
- Didn't know that was a thing.
- I'm scared now, to be honest.
(laughing)
I didn't realize that was something
I should be worrying about.
- Get an alert when a MySQL dump is loaded.
Like, okay, like how does that happen?
I don't know, but that's pretty awesome that it's possible
and also frightening.
- Yeah.
And Sam out in the audience says,
"Ironically, the log for shell
might have its own vulnerabilities."
(laughing)
You know, that thing's been patched a couple of times.
It's gonna be a big, big problem.
Anyway, canary tokens,
I think this is broadly useful for Python people.
You could put the URL stuff inside of your app.
You could put an email inside of locations.
There's lots of stuff that I like this,
the database restore type things and so on.
This looks useful.
- Yeah, so I'm still a little lost.
You throw this, like for instance,
like you said in the admin section
that you shouldn't be using and you just know about it.
So you don't click it or something.
- So imagine this, imagine you've got in your admin section,
you've got a, like a search for user button
and then next to it, you could just put an export all data.
And then put one of these URLs at the endpoint at app.
And nobody who works, you just tell everyone,
never click the export all data.
It doesn't do anything.
But if someone were to break in,
what's the first thing they're gonna want?
Oh, well, let's get the export all data.
Boom, they'll go click it and you'll know.
They're still in, it's bad, but at least they're not in
and just have unlimited time to be in, you know?
- He's a user.
- And other stuff too, like let's say you've got
a Django website and you stick,
you load a like a PHP admin page or something like that,
just at the same URL,
in case somebody's trying to grab that.
- Yep.
Yeah, a lot of interesting little breadcrumbs
you can leave in there.
Okay.
Kim, that brings us to yours.
- Sure.
The first topic I was going to talk about
are actually two similar,
but not quite the same pieces of software
by PyAutoGUI and PyWinAuto
are both toolkits for automating GUIs,
effectively, well, automating GUIs
for interacting programmatically with GUIs.
- Nice. - Pywin Auto.
- Which is really, really hard, right?
- Which is-- - Hey, before we go on,
before we go on, could you give that
like three control pluses?
Just right now. - Oh, sure, sorry.
I was just seeing that's a little bit on the small side.
- Thanks. - How's that?
- A little more.
- Space to play with.
- There you go.
- Fair enough.
Well, let me just, while I remember,
do it to this one as well.
They both happen to be read the docs documents.
So you're quite right, the programmatically controlling a GUI, it can be quite a pain,
particularly for GUIs that aren't particularly easy to understand.
And the reason I bring tools like this up is that there's quite a lot of use cases I
can think of two examples at the top of my own career, and I'm sure there's hundreds
more, where this kind of thing is useful, and you might not know it's something you
can do.
And the kind of examples I'm thinking of are particularly in, I'm sure, much enterprise
and in industrial software, when you get a piece of equipment, you frequently get a GUI
tool that accompanies it.
Probably no API, right?
Well, no API whatsoever.
There's a tool you fire up and you set all the settings, but because the company that
supplied you the piece of equipment, they don't write software.
It's not their thing.
They either outsource the tool or the intern writes it, and it has 50 checkboxes laid out
in grid form, and you need to set it up every single time you want to use that piece of
software.
to remember what you set, there's nothing to do.
And I've worked with a couple of those systems,
and I see Brian, I think you probably have as well.
We basically, there's a piece of paper
next to the computer the software is on
with a screen print of what the settings should be.
So that the person, poor sucker has to come down
and use it, knows which of the 50 tick boxes to check.
And then they have to check that the pattern
effectively matches on screen, and then they hit run.
And something like PyAutoGUI or PyOneAuto
are both useful so that you can effectively script
the startup of that app.
And you can say to you write a small piece of Python
that fires this tool up, identifies all the checkboxes,
ticks the ones you've programmed in,
and then either leaves it for the human to push go
or whatever it is the app does,
or for that matter, pushes go itself
and then closes the app and records that it did that.
So that kind of use case is very powerful.
And I think there are lots of cases,
particularly in enterprise software or internal software
that somebody wrote for the company
to do something very useful,
but it's been around for 20 years.
and the guy who wrote it is not around.
Nobody wants to touch it 'cause the source is terrifying.
So nobody's going to sit down and change it.
- How do you even get that Visual Basic 6
or Visual Basic 5 and stuff?
- Well, exactly.
How do you even compile it now?
Exactly.
So to be able to wrap it
is a very powerful thing to be able to do.
And the other kind of use case that's somewhat related,
it also comes to mind is,
I've spent a large amount of my career
doing industrial automation, factory-based type work.
And there, the faster you can go and the fewer bits of,
the fewer steps you need a human to repeatedly do,
the better for you in many ways that the human's time
is best spent actually manipulating objects
and checking things rather than opening pieces of software
and clicking boxes and closing them again.
So quite frequently, we've had cases on the production line
where the vendor of the chip we're using
has supplied this tool that does some security related thing
and it's a GUI tool and every single time
you would have to open it up,
you'd have to click the same two boxes,
you'd have to say, yes, secure this chip,
close it again, repeat,
wait for another one to arrive at your workstation.
And if you can automate it again with a wrapping tool,
nobody need even be involved at all.
Effectively part of your production process is you wrap it,
you fire up the tool,
you click the two buttons programmatically,
you hit go and you close it again and repeat.
And again, I personally have encountered situations
where that's useful and I'd like to,
I would imagine I'm far from alone in it,
so I just thought I'd mention these things do exist.
I suspect.
Lots of people do use them,
but for people who don't know that they're there,
very useful things to be able to do.
You know, wrapping GUIs is,
it's a bit tedious up front
because often these tools aren't very well written.
So you'll have checkbox one, checkbox four,
checkbox 27, checkbox 295,
and no obvious naming consistency with what they do
or how they work.
But once you've figured it out,
let the computer worry,
let the script worry about what those checkboxes do.
- I've seen the backside of that code
where you're like looking at some event handler
and it's like, if checkbox 24.checked,
then do this, like what in the world?
Like who didn't want to name this?
'Cause they got a program against those names.
That's insane.
- Well, they just do one at a time.
When you're working on-
- That's exactly it, yeah.
- Yeah, so you're working on one feature
and you go, oh, I need a checkbox.
Oh, the default is checkbox 24.
Then you look for the, you do the callback handling
and you just did it, so you know it's 24.
>> Exactly. Don't want to bother changing it.
It's cool. >> Exactly.
>> Is there an automation place in your world?
>> Yeah, so there's, like Kim said,
there's places where tools
that don't necessarily have a user interface.
The thing that this doesn't,
I don't think these do like web stuff,
the web automations, other tools.
>> Well, I presume you could automate a browser,
but I mean, by the time you're doing that,
you might as well be using the tools designed for it.
>> Yeah, Selenium or something.
What I'd really hope is anybody that has any sort of tool that they're writing on a web.
So web frameworks often get -- internal tools get written in web frameworks
and then people forget to throw IDs in things.
So the best way to automate a web stuff is to have an ID that you can grab onto,
but often they're just these nested div nightmares.
But anyway, yeah, there's a couple of tools
that we've used by WinAuto for that are, it's pretty nice.
- Yeah, very nice.
Yeah, it seems like if you're building a GUI app,
you could test it with this,
like write sort of full on integration tests
from the outside.
And also I was talking to somebody and they were like,
"Well, this app that I work on,
it doesn't have like a concept of a back button.
So you drive into the menu, hit a thing, go,
and then it'll take you back home in like 10 steps."
I could definitely see a little toolbar thing,
you press a couple of buttons,
like get me to this scenario and I'll put the last thing in,
get me to that scenario,
like do the nine steps, I'll do the 10th.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- In many ways, the way I've mainly encountered it
has been that the first scenario laid out,
not so much actually automating the full running of the tool,
but setting the tool up so that it is in the right state
for what the company needs
without having somebody have to either consult a document
and risk getting it wrong
or not know which of the settings they should have
'cause that piece of paper
isn't with the computer anymore,
all that kind of thing, it shouldn't happen, but it does.
And it's much easier to have this kind of,
to have the computer worry about what the settings should be.
Yeah, I do think the program should remember that,
but if they don't, they don't.
It's not much you can do to change that off of the fact.
- External intelligence for a bad app, that's right.
- Well, there's also like API stuff
that people forget about.
I've got a device that I need to automate
connecting it to Windows and getting the device set up
or something every time I plug one in.
And just automating that works sometimes too.
So anyway.
- All right, Brian, over to you.
- Thanks.
I saw this, Brett Cannon wrote an article
called a reverse chronological,
Reverse chronology of some Python features and I really love this article. It's pretty simple
One of the things I like about it is just because we cover so much and we've been covering Python releases for quite a while
I kind of forget which releases got I got which feature in so a a really brief
You know rundown of some of the different features is nice like last week
who were talking and saying, well, you're on,
if you're on 3.7, why would you want to move forward?
And I can't remember which features in which.
So having a quick bullet list, like in 3.10,
we got the match statement, of course,
we've talked about that recently,
but also better error messages.
And I'm gonna pause a little bit.
Brett brings up in the introduction discussion
that if you're kind of one of those people that think
Python's kind of getting bloated
and they're throwing too much stuff in it.
And I wish that we had the good old days
where you could just think about all Python
in your own head.
Well, you kind of throw everything out.
He recommends going down this list
and picking the first feature
that you don't think you could live without.
And everything before that led to that.
So you can't throw that stuff out either.
It all kind of goes together.
And one of the examples is the match statement
or the, what are they, pattern matching.
That was sorta controversial,
but the code to get that to work involved,
or the process involved even like making a new parser
for Python or using a new parser for Python.
And, but with that new parser,
then things like better error messages are possible.
So if you like better error messages, which I do,
that means 310 and everything below kind of has to stay.
But anyway, it's kind of funny.
Moving on, like I forgot what the dictionary support
for like the or and or equal,
that came in in 3.9.
So if somebody's thinking, well, why should I upgrade?
This is a good list to take a look at.
- Nice, all right, I did the little exercise.
I've just added three, seven.
- Three, seven for you.
So what was the thing in three, seven
that you can't live without?
- So the dictionary preserving order stuff
is really nice for like reading and writing files
and making sure that they don't diff hard.
You know what I mean?
If you try to like, so they're in the order,
you put them there.
All the other stuff I'm not hating on it.
Like I like the walrus operator.
I like some of the other things.
like the lowercase list bracket int
rather than importing types.
All those are great.
I'm not knocking them.
I'm just saying like, where would I go?
Oh, it starts to hurt where?
It really starts to hurt me at 3, 7 and below.
Well, I was trying a Jupyter, an interactive Jupyter system
the other day, looking at some data science stuff,
and it was already set up.
And I tried to throw in the fString value equal thing
to be able to quickly debug an item, and it didn't work.
I'm like what the heck and it turned out it was using 3 7 and not 3 8
And apparently I'm very used to that and I don't think I could live without it
but and then a reminder also that
311 when it comes out in a year
It's just gonna have a lot of speed ups
So yeah, if that has it comes up a lot of performance stuff and like that's my new number. Yeah, I
If you forced me to roll back,
I would refuse to go further than 3.6
because I must have those f-strings.
- Yeah.
- Because they're basically so much,
they just make your code so much more attractive.
But that said, while I don't necessarily use
everything that comes in the new versions,
I don't particularly have any problem with them being there.
I'm quite happy to just use the parser Python I want.
And what really happens to me is that
I don't necessarily know I can do something
until two versions later.
I probably only started doing that value equals on 3.9,
for example.
- Yeah.
- Mainly because that's probably the first time
I needed it more than anything else.
I don't particularly rush forward
and use the new features when they're available,
but I'm glad they're there when I do ultimately want them.
- Yeah, 3.6 is an interesting example you bring up
because it's got f-strings.
It's got a whole bunch of other stuff too,
but really we can stop with f-strings.
- Pretty much, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah.
And then the debugging stuff, Sam, the audience says,
yes, f curly bracket name equals
is indispensable for debugging.
- I'm with him, as I say,
I hadn't used it when it first became available,
but I would really not want to not have it available now.
- Yeah.
- I'm a caveman print debugger, so yeah.
- I like your take on it.
Like it's not gonna hurt me if I don't care about it.
I think one of the powers of Python
is that you can be very successful with Python
with a partial, quite partial understanding
of what it even is.
Like you don't need to know what a generator is,
what a yield is, like what an expression is,
what a class is, maybe not even how to create a function,
just write the code top to bottom
and it'll probably still do something for you.
- Exactly.
- And so you can sort of bring these in
when it makes sense.
- Yeah, I would definitely still not teach match statements
to beginners, it's unnecessary.
- No, exactly.
- So, yeah.
- Totally agree.
- Whereas I would use if strings, for example,
a beginner because it's just so much more readable than the other stuff is. But you're right, you
don't have to magically, you don't have to use it all because it's there. Yeah, I'm sure there's
people out there who feel like it's I got to use it, it's here. But no, I agree with you. All right.
How about I don't think I've ever written a Wallace operator, for example, sorry, you're saying
Yeah, I actually, I actually took down a talk Python website or the train website, one of them
with the walrus operator, because I put the walrus operator in a utility script that's not actually
used by the site, but the site scans all the files trying to figure out where the
handlers, the view methods are, and it killed it because I forgot that this is
way back when it was still on 3.7. So that was my first really, oh my gosh. But yeah,
now I use it. It's good. Alright, so I want to talk about something that I've
actually personally been working on lately. This is a follow-up to a Talk Python
episode I did where I interviewed Mike Bayer. He came on and did a great job, talked about
SQLAlchemy 2 and so on. And I mentioned that, you know, just the way that Python's GC is set up
is it's somewhat hostile to things like ORMs where they have to create a bunch of objects
and return them to you in one batch. And what do I mean by that? Well, if I'm going to do a query
and it's going to return a thousand records, like the best case scenario is it has to create a
thousand classes, SQLAlchemy models, and give them back, right? If I'm asking for them as a list.
Well, the way the GC in Python works, not the reference counting, but the garbage collector is
after 700 allocations of container types, classes, dictionaries, lists, etc. that do not get cleaned
700 surviving over the cleanups over a period of time,
that's going to trigger a garbage collection.
And so I said, "Ah, you know, like,
is there something you could do?
Is there something we could like kind of think about
with ORMs?"
This is not at all specific to SQLAlchemy.
This just happens.
I have an example here called "Pythons GC and ORMs"
as a app and a little conversation on GitHub.
And I said, "Is there something we maybe can do?
Or have you guys thought about it?
'Cause I don't really sure what the answer is."
and said, "Not so much, sure, but here, check this out."
So I created this app.
It creates a thousand records in both a SQLite database
and a MongoDB database.
We have like two really different examples.
And then you run a query that returns 20,000 records.
It's probably a lot.
- Just a note, you mean it makes 100,000 records?
- Yeah, if I didn't say that.
100,000 records in the database
and it gets 20,000 of them back, okay?
It's probably a little extra,
But for example, if you go to,
go over to the Talk Python Training site,
over here we've got a sitemap.
And in this sitemap,
there are many, many,
looking down the page down arrow,
and you can just barely see it.
We've got to get like 5,000 records, 6,000 records,
just to like list out the number of the pages
that contain transcripts for the sitemap, right?
So it's not entirely unreasonable
that you would get a bunch of records back
and then do something like render a page with it, right?
Well, under this scenario, if you just run straight Python,
that single query results in 1,859 garbage collection runs
just to get one answer back.
Is that insane?
- None of which is garbage.
- Yeah, it's not garbage yet
because it's just being realized from the database, right?
Like it hasn't even come into existence all the way yet.
And it's just like garbage, garbage, garbage, garbage,
garbage.
And it takes 900 milliseconds.
If you go and you tweak it in a way that I described here,
which you may or may not want to do, but if you did,
if you tweak the garbage collector,
it will go from 1,800 collections to 29, 64 times less.
The speed of the program is 23% faster.
Okay, but it also uses less memory.
Okay, less garbage collection.
Less, a lot less garbage collection.
And it's not just 1800 versus 29.
Python has this 100 to 10 to 1 ratio of Gen 0, Gen 1, and Gen 2 collections.
And Gen 0 collections are pretty cheap because it just touches new memory and looks at it.
Gen 1 looks at like stuff that's only been inspected once.
and Gen 2 inspects the entire memory space.
What to see, right?
So this one, this one will also trigger,
what is that?
- 185.
- Yeah, 185 Gen 1, so 18 Gen 2s, right?
So it's not just, oh, there's fewer,
there's also like this other 29 here,
this is zero Gen 2 collections, very likely, right?
So it's not just the number,
they're also like cheaper than doing that.
So this is pretty interesting.
What do you got to do?
You just say you run less frequently on allocations
and then leave everything else alone.
Does it make a lot of sense for absolutely everything?
Probably not.
There's probably some scenario with lots of cycles
that this is a problem.
But anyway, this is an interesting thing to sort of consider
if you are doing some kind of API or a website
or something that queries a lot of data,
over 700 records, basically.
you're going to absolutely encourage GC
when you know it's not garbage, right?
So I don't know.
I thought this was interesting.
I'll put it out there for people to play with
and get some feedback.
Should be fun to hear about it.
- I think this is very interesting.
And I'm going to, I plan on playing
with the garbage collection myself.
So I'm glad you have this little sample app thing up
to start playing with it.
One of the things that you can do that a lot of people
don't mess with too much is not slowing down the frequency,
but you can disable it and enable it.
And I'm not sure--
I'd like to play with that a little bit more to see if you
can kind of kick it off or something like that, because--
>>You can disable it, and you can call GC collect
if you need to.
So it's there.
I'm not sure if it makes sense to do it,
but the switches are there.
- Yeah, I mean, there's times where,
I mean, you're not gonna get real time with Python,
but you can get, there's times where you know
that you're not doing anything else,
so garbage collection's fine.
And there's times where you're doing an event
and you really wanna get done with this as fast as possible.
So it might make sense to turn off GC.
- Sure, and for people who are not super focused on this,
turning off garbage collection
or altering garbage collection
only affects a very small portion of Python's memory,
because the primary way is reference counting.
So reference counting, things up referring to it,
it goes away.
Only in the case where there are cycles
does GC even apply, right?
So that's actually,
unless you've got really interesting algorithms
that are super focused on that kind of stuff,
you know, you probably don't even have cycles
or very rarely do you.
- Yeah, interesting.
- It's not a one size fits all solution,
but where it does fit,
it's a fairly simple thing to do
that really makes a heck of a difference.
- Yeah, it's quite interesting.
So my musings was, well, maybe someday Python
will have an adaptive GC where it runs
a certain number of times and says,
oh, I ran, but I didn't actually find any garbage,
any cycles, so let me back off that threshold
by a factor or two.
And then I didn't find any garbage again,
so I'll back it off.
And then I'll go, look, I found a bunch,
so now we gotta start doing this more frequently.
And I could see like an adaptive garbage collector
turning these numbers, but until then,
I just cranked it up.
Yeah.
Interesting.
All right.
Yeah.
Kim, you want to take us out of here for our main topics?
Sure.
The other topic I was going to talk about is a tool called Docker Slim, which basically
is-- It already sounds good.
I don't know what it does, but-- I'm already in.
I want my Docker to be slim.
Let's do it.
Yeah.
It's effectively, as far as I can tell, not quite magic, but it certainly seems like it.
I use Docker quite extensively at work,
and because I use a fair amount of it at work,
I started using it for a lot of personal stuff as well,
and to websites I deploy in my own writing.
Little things running my own systems
are all in Docker containers.
And unless you take a lot of care about it,
your Docker images can end up quite large.
If you start with just Python in an Ubuntu base,
for example, you're probably looking at
about a gig of Docker image before you get anything done.
Now, the way Docker works,
unless you have just one of those things,
if you've got more than one,
you start to benefit from shared layers.
So you're not having a gig and another gig
and another gig, et cetera,
but still it all kind of adds up.
Docker slim is a tool to basically look
at your existing images, do some analysis
and give you back a much smaller
and in many ways, much more secure image.
I have run this, I read earlier today,
just to kind of check that I wasn't misremembering
from the last time I used it.
And I fed it an image I had,
which was an incredibly simple, small little flask API
app I had written. And it would had one job it basically
whenever you send anything to an endpoint, it printed out what
that was. I forget exactly why I needed that. I think I was
having trouble figuring out some suppliers that it wasn't
documented how some suppliers waybook was going to work. So
basically, I set this up and I said, Talk to me and then look
at what it said. But exactly. So I've noticed
you better than trusting their outdated, crappy, inconsistent
documentation is just alright, why don't you just call it?
We'll just print out the JSON document.
- Well, exactly.
- And then we'll go from there.
Yeah.
- So yeah, as a side note,
that was quite an easy thing to do,
but that was, I just put that into a Ubuntu-based container
running, I forget exactly what,
presumably I was using FastAPI.
So it would have been Python and Ubuntu and FastAPI
and et cetera.
And that was about a gig of image.
I fed that to Docker slim and I ended up with 48 megs.
And it still worked.
It did everything it was supposed to do.
Granted, I fed the simplest thing I had.
I mean, it had one endpoint and so forth.
I have--
- There's a lot of dependencies.
There's Python, there's Flask,
maybe there's even microSD or something running there,
who knows, but yeah.
- Well, exactly.
What it has done is it's closed down
all sorts of other angles of attack,
makes it sound a bit dramatic,
but all sorts of ways that you could interface
with the container that you don't necessarily need.
It no longer has, for example,
it bash is no longer available.
You can't run it in interactive mode
and talk to it, which is not necessarily
a 100% positive thing, it makes debugging a bit harder,
but they do have some solutions for how you can do that
with side containers and talk to it in other ways
and the like.
And if you go through their documentation,
effectively, they're doing all the security stuff
and the app armoring stuff and all sorts of things
that I know are important,
but I don't know enough about to do right.
I don't trust myself to do those things correctly.
I can basically follow someone's suggestions,
but I have absolutely no way of knowing
if the suggestions I'm following are valid.
I'm not immersed enough in this world
to know what the best thing is to do.
So I'm much happier to have somebody come along and say,
we've written this tool, we get this stuff.
We'll do the best we can to make it more secure.
Even if it isn't 100% secure,
it's far better than I was going to achieve my own.
And I haven't used it enough to get a 100% recommendation
that this will fit every use case.
I'm sure like every tool is there's things that does well,
there's things that doesn't do well,
there's some use cases where it's maybe not so suited.
but just from a little bit of experimentation with it,
it looks like something I'm gonna be inserting
into my tool chain where I can,
because the smaller the images are, the better, really.
Especially if we're all working from home,
we're pulling these things down from servers
that aren't actually in the building that you're in anymore.
- And if you're doing continuous deployment,
which means pushing those actual images,
then you wanna go that way. - Well, exactly, yes.
- Yeah, cool, very nice.
- Yeah, one of the things that Docker's used for,
I think a lot of web people don't think about
is cross compiling.
That's one of the places where Docker shows up
and it's one of the places I use it
is to compile on a machine that I don't have access to.
So I can have a Docker image,
like I can have a Windows machine
with a Linux Docker image or something.
And I can do compiling in there.
So slimming that down speeds up my compiles
or I conceptually would.
So I think this is something that definitely to try
if you're using that.
- Exactly.
You've reminded me of in a similar vein,
Docker is the basis of our continuous integration systems.
The ultimate end result is built inside a Docker container
with all the bits we need.
That can take quite a while because it can be quite large.
You can slim that down as well.
The faster you'll see AI is the better for you already.
- Yeah, always.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right, well, Brian, I think that might be it.
Time for some extras.
Oh, I do want to do a quick follow-up.
I thought these were extras, but they're actually not.
They're things that I do want to point out really quick.
I actually gave a talk on this whole memory thing,
if that GC conversation sounds interesting to you,
over at the Python web conferences here.
So people can check that out
and also have a talk Python class
that like dives into a whole bunch of this stuff.
- Okay. - Nice.
- I'm going to include that in the before thing.
Now we're at the extras.
Let's talk about them.
What do you got?
The only thing, one of the things I wanna shout out
is to everybody that supported the pytest book.
So at Pragmatic, if you just go to the main page,
there is a best sellers link
that has had Python testing with pytest on it
for many weeks now in the top six.
And I just wanted to thank everybody
that supported the book and helped the success of this.
Also the feedback that I got of the technical reviewers
and plus many other people going through
and submitting a RADA is gonna make this
a really solid book and I'm really just happy
to be part of a community to put this together, so thanks.
- Yeah, congratulations, that's awesome.
Kim, you got anything actually
you wanna throw out there?
- A couple of small things I was hoping to mention
if we had the time.
See, we've actually got Ness with DNS up on screen.
this is a good place to start.
I just wanted to mention this little website,
messwithdns.net, which Julia Evans,
who on Twitter is Bork,
and produces a variety of excellent webzines and so forth.
I think you've actually, you've discussed her Git
learning webzines before.
That's the one, yeah.
And I think there's an HR-friendly one whose name
I can't remember, 'cause we all remember that.
The memorable one, yeah, exactly.
She released something I got, yeah.
She released messwithdns.net recently
as effectively a way to play with DNS
without breaking your actual website,
which isn't something I'd ever thought to look for,
but now that it's around, it's actually a brilliant idea.
There are some hard to understand things based into DNS.
What is a record in a CNAME?
And what, you know, if your TTL is a three-digit number
versus a five-digit number, what's the difference?
Or for that matter, what does TTL mean?
It's not necessarily an explainer for all these things,
but it is a way to make these settings
and see what they do
without actually breaking a real website.
So effectively, she's spun up a sub domain
with a assigned name.
This one I happen to be on is goblin61messwithdns.com.
The worst you can do is break goblin61.messwithdns.com
and that will then just go away
for the next person who comes along.
So it's actually a really smart, really clever idea.
Typical to Julia's thoroughness,
she's got a series of experimental suggestions on the side.
Here are some things you can try, here are some tutorials,
how about making a CNAME?
Or here are some weird things you can try.
What happens if you have a very long TTL?
Or you convince three different DNS servers
that your subdomain has three different IPs.
Why you would do that is a mystery to me,
but what would happen if you did
is something you can explore with this site
without actually breaking your real website.
And this seems like a very useful learning tool.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Cool, I love it, that's fantastic.
So it would, one other, well, two other small things
I just wanted to mention.
One, just because I use it all the time
and I don't know how common knowledge it is.
It is possible in Python,
and I don't have a webpage to open for this,
to run a small little web server.
If you do python-m, what's it?
Http.serve or .server, I've gone blank on which it is now,
to be honest, .serve, I think.
- Oh, .server.
- Yeah, I'm reading your notes.
I don't actually know.
- I'm just going back to the notes to have a look myself.
that effectively fires up a web server
in the directory you opened it in
and serves up the files that are there
or the subdirectories that are in there.
There's no security, there's no attractiveness,
there's no styling, there's no anything of the sort.
You wouldn't serve this to the public.
But if you wanted to get a file off the machine,
and I do this quite a lot to get files onto my phone,
for example, firing up a web server there and then
and just pointing by that script or your own,
just to send your browser to the local host
with the port you gave it
and just download the files from there.
It's a useful thing to be able to do.
- Yeah, that's a cool trick.
- It's a bit of deep trip.
- Basically, yeah.
- Exactly.
And then the final little extra I just wanted to talk about
and this is a little more tongue in cheek somewhat.
In both last week's Python Bytes
and on recent Talk Python episodes,
you have been speaking a little bit
about different ways of doing Git.
You were discussing doing all your Git on the CLI.
And I think one of your audience members
that the last Python byte suggested,
the way they do Git is just mash all the buttons
they can find in VS Code.
There is, I just want to put out there,
there is a middle ground that you could be looking at.
There's a tool called Magit, M-A-G-I-T,
which is effectively, if you're an Emacs user
and you don't know Magit,
you should change that immediately.
Magit is effectively a brilliant way of doing,
to me, a brilliant, indispensable way
of doing Git inside Emacs.
Granted, it doesn't mean you should learn Emacs,
but in just a couple of short years after that,
you should be an expert at,
you should find Magit indispensable.
It'll take you a couple of years to learn Emacs,
I'm not disputing that,
but once you've got the Emacs down,
Magit really is an excellent option
to look at doing your Git with.
So if you're tired of doing it on the CLI,
just set some years aside,
learn yourself some Emacs,
turn to Magit and then wonder
how you ever did anything else.
- Set some years aside.
I don't think that's fair to Emacs,
but just a little bit of a too much.
- I'll concede Emacs is a much longer learning curve than VI,
but it's not here, Scott.
And I say this, I mean, yeah.
- Yeah, and Mario and the audience is taking credit
for the VS Code button matching.
- Right.
- Right on.
Cool, yeah, that's a great recommendation.
- I should just point out in terms of it being unfair
I've been using it for more than 20 years
and I find it almost impossible to use anything else,
but I'm sure it didn't take me years to learn.
It's just been a long time.
- That's right.
Cool, all right, I got a few throw out there.
Actually just one.
I made a comment, I think on the last show, Brian,
about using emojis in my code.
- Yeah.
- I want to bring that example up.
So here's like a little CMS thing that I got going on.
And if you return a collection,
like themes are represented by these little tags
and if you return a collection,
the comment has a list of emojis.
If you return, if they're just like processing
a single thing, you get that emoji.
For pages, you get a list of page emojis and so on.
Anyway, that's what I had in mind when I talked about that.
- That's pretty cool use.
- Yeah, you can sort of just scan through,
oh look, there's a list of these.
This must be doing a bunch of stuff.
Or I don't know, I could probably come up with something
like a modifying, I'm gonna change a theme
versus read a theme or something like that.
- Yeah. - Anyway.
Well, that brings us to the laughs
and I hope you all enjoy schadenfreude
because it's bad this time.
Thank you, Love4J.
Okay, so let's see.
First of all, this is not schadenfreude.
This is just something about the cookies.
My daughter yesterday gave me this candle.
It has a website.
It says, "We use cookies to improve our performance."
And then me, same, I just eat cookies.
I thought that was really funny for like a tech candle
that she's doing.
- It should be a tin of cookies though.
- I know it should.
Absolutely should.
At least it should smell like cookies.
It says scented, I have no idea what scent it is,
but it better smell like cookies.
- Does it smell like websites?
Maybe.
- Maybe.
And then I just want to point out more practically,
I have this add-on you can get for all the browsers.
I don't care about cookies,
and if it sees one of those cookie warnings,
it'll try to click it and just accept it.
- Oh, this is indispensable.
That's brilliant.
- And then Brian Skin starts us off with the log4j stuff.
So if you remember, if you're aware, log4j,
the problem with log4j is if you try to log a piece of text,
even as an argument, if that text has J and D I colon L A D
P L A L D A P colon slash slash to some Java library,
instead of logging it, it will execute that Java stuff.
Even if it's remotely on the internet,
it'll output the result of that,
like you're hacked or whatever, right?
And so we've all heard of the little Bobby tables, right?
Here's the modern day one.
Hi, this is your son's school.
We're having computer trouble.
Oh dear, did he break something?
Well, in a way.
Did you really name your son,
Curly, you know, dollar curly J and D I colon L D A P colon slash slash evil corp
Parentheses princess e Bobby. Oh, yes little Bobby Jindy we call him
No, we've got our servers crypto lock I locked I hope you're happy I hope you've learned to say sometimes you're long for J inputs
Yeah
This is gonna go on it'll be the neck it isn't log4j. It'll be something else next year
Yeah, well, I mean it's been it's been there for 10 years
It's not a new thing. Unfortunately, yeah, it's actually been a vulnerability. It's just
Feature
And Brian helpfully suggests this actually came from log4j
memes calm
So we got to go there for a second
- Well, of course that exists.
- Of course, and oh my gosh, like look at this picture.
So Brian, would you describe this person for me
on the screen?
There's a person in a sane next to him.
- Old white guy.
- To me, he looks like a perfect sort of grandpa
sort of character, right?
Getting up there, probably 70.
You know, nothing wrong with the guy,
but it says upgrading Log4j three times.
Wasn't that stressful?
Dave, 28 years old.
(laughing)
What else have we got in here?
- We've got- - I wish that was outrageously
funny and not just kind of truish, but yeah.
- I know, here's like a 1940s looking picture,
like a dad and some kids hanging around.
Daddy, what did you do during the great war?
The Log for Shell incident.
Let's see.
There's a few of you going here, like,
there's the, how many days since such and such accident?
Zero days without Log for JCVE.
And there's like Homer running around
with like a nuclear glowing stick.
You could just spend some time in this place.
It's probably unhealthy.
There's like a grim reaper.
Just going through technology.
It has a log for J on the grim reaper, you know.
Let me see if I can find one more of that.
There's some really good ones.
This one is probably good.
There's a picture of a guy in a tuxedo.
It says, vendor not vulnerable to log for J,
but there's a mirror and you see the back of him.
His clothes are just all gone.
It says, "Use of EOL."
- Yuck.
- Yeah, that one's pretty gross.
I want to get that off.
But yeah, these are just fantastic here.
So anyway, people can check out the memes.
Thanks, Brian, for sending that in.
Brian Skin.
- Yeah, I have to say, I am reminded.
I did see one the other day.
I don't know that I could put it up now,
but it's effectively that,
I've just seen it in various other memes,
a chap receiving an award from probably his manager.
So, you know, me receiving an award from the manager
for not being vulnerable to the log4j vulnerabilities.
And the inside thinking,
let's mainly because I chose not to log in.
I completely forgot to log anything.
(laughing)
- Exactly, that's really good.
Yeah, here's a tweet.
Today, Java runs on billions of devices.
It's not a statement of pride,
but a statement of pure terror.
(laughing)
All right, well, I don't wanna hit on Java too hard,
but the log4j, I just cannot believe somebody thought
It's a fantastic idea to execute remote code
that you cannot escape.
- From a logging system.
- Yeah, in a logging system.
It's just, what did you think you would get?
So here we are with log4jmemes.com
if you wanna scroll through it.
- Let's back up and say somebody thought
writing an application in Java was a good idea.
No, sorry.
(laughing)
I'll get hate mail for that one.
So don't mail Brian.
Don't email Brian.
He knows.
All right.
Well, so Brian, that's it for the year, isn't it?
I mean, we're going to take a little bit of time off.
Yeah.
Some well-deserved time off.
Yeah, absolutely.
So thank you everyone for listening.
Kim, thanks for coming to join us this time.
Brian, as always.
Thank you.
And we'll see everybody next year.
Yeah.
Thank you for having me guys.
That was, that was brilliant.
- Yeah, you're welcome.
And if you're out there
and you still haven't filled out that form
and given us our feedback,
let us know.
The Google Form link is at the top of the show notes.
All right, bye.